---
title: 'Humming Now #12'
description: ''
date: '2010-05-22T03:43:00.000Z'
categories: ''
keywords: ''
slug: /@kuppurao/humming-now-12-65afe4830ff3
---

Around the same time tomorrow, I would have returned from (my hopefully terrific time) listening to Rama Varma’s rendition of classical music. Rama Varma is one of the prolific artists I discovered in the recent past. His level of precision, variety, mastery over language is commendable.

Among the different things he introduced to me is the ragam called **Kunthalavarali**.

A Ragam (aka Raag aka Raaga) is nothing but a certain combination of notes. It is quite mathematically intense like [I have explained before](http://kuppurao.com/blog/2010/04/classical-music-demystified/ "Classical Music – Demystified"). A lot of times, you don’t really have to know anything about the ragam in order to appreciate it. Hell, you don’t even have to enjoy the music — as long as it is reaching your ears — rest assured, its working its magic on you.

I know nothing about the theory of Kunthalavarali, but the effect it has on me is amazing. I guess I have to give due credits to the singers of the two songs, which have come to become my favorites.

**Fav #1**: Tillana sung by Rama Varma (Composed by Balamuralikrishna)

**Fav #2**: Bhogeendra Shaayinam by Sanjay Subramanyam (Composed by Swathi Thirunaal)

It is customary for me to mention a movie song or two for every raga I hum, but there are practically no movie songs in this ragam. Except one song by Ilayaraja, but it is highly average — so I’ll skip.

PS:  
 1) Both songs I mentioned as favorites can be found on Youtube. Try them. Atleast the #1  
 2) Speaking of mathematics and music, you should [try this](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Emc18GpAeRY). —   
 Humming Now is an expression of my picks in classical music, that tend to become sort of my seasonal favorite. There are [11 previous posts](http://kuppurao.com/blog/category/entertainment/music-entertainment/humming-now/) in this series.