---
title: 'Humming now #11'
description: ''
date: '2010-04-27T23:33:00.000Z'
categories: ''
keywords: ''
slug: /@kuppurao/humming-now-11-6664ae0828d4
---

For this episode of Humming Now, I take a raga which is associated with a feeling of majesty and an undertone of devotion.

Its Hindustani equivalent is called _Puriya Dhanashree_. In Carnatic, it is _Panthuvarali_. I dont know enough to say these 2 ragams are _equals_ or _equivalents_, but a very accomplished professional musician acquaintance of mine said they are equal. So they are.

The best example perhaps of Panthuvarali, if you are familiar with film music from the 80s is _Ezhu Swarangalukkul_ sung by Vani Jayaram. Her attitude brings goosebumps to me.

If you are not familiar with Tamil film music, deprived of exposure to this era of music and/or if you refuse to have a taste of olden days musicians (like MSV), you should listen to _Hai Rama ye Kya Hua_ song from _Rangeela_.

Ilayaraja has done a concerto style piece in _Rajapaarvai_ and the song _Rojaavai Thalaattum_ from _Ninaivellaam Nithya_ is also a _Panthuvarali_.

I do not have a specific favorite in classical music, but there is a Jugalbandi between Purbayan Chatterjee (Sitar) and Shashank (Flute) I listened to, which got me glued to this raga. Of course, there are famous numbers like Appa Rama Bhakti, Shambho Mahadeva etc…

**Humming now** is a [series of posts](http://kuppurao.com/blog/category/entertainment/music-entertainment/humming-now/) (as you can see, this is the 11th), focused on sharing with you nuances of classical music, how they relate to the pop (film) music we are surrounded by. Some people just can’t relate both — they should [see this](http://kuppurao.com/blog/2010/04/classical-music-demystified/ "Classical Music – Demystified").